Matt Damon brings wise-cracking life to Mars this rousing sci-fi survival story from rebounding director Ridley Scott.
Handling the elements of his signature style with a flair he hasn't shown since Gladiator (2000), Ridley Scott returns to mainstream mastery with The Martian, a space misadventure turned survivor’s tale. Similarities to Apollo 13 and the more recent Gravity will be obvious to anyone who’s ever rocketed into zero-g thrills, but that’s not to say that Scott—who does well by Andy Weir’s science-heavy 2011 novel (smartly streamlined by scripter Drew Goddard)—doesn't bring his own spin. A scary storm on Mars swarms the Ares 3 crew in a blizzard of frozen dust reminiscent of the inhospitable planet from Alien (1979). After an emergency evacuation strands Matt Damon's presumed-dead astronaut Mark Watney on his own, his initial wandering of the vacant “hab” outpost plays like any number of Scott's moody sci-fi classics, from Blade Runner to Prometheus.

But differently, The Martian has spunk in store: “I’m not going to die here,” Watney says in his video diary, and we actually hear a heavy-metal power chord as this chatterbox of a botanist gets to work manufacturing water from hydrogen, creating a greenhouse-enclosed potato farm (fertilized by the disappeared crew’s waste packets) and cooking up a way to contact Mission Control. Bringing optimism, nerd-itude and a touch of crazy to his character's solo ordeal—at one point, scraggly Watney calls himself a “space pirate”—Damon is the key to the movie’s exuberance. This is his Cast Away and it’s hard to imagine another star commanding the role with such boyish, brainy confidence.

The rest of the film, though, about Watney’s rescue, suffers slightly in comparison. Sometimes it plays rivetingly, via Jeff Daniels's NASA administrator eyeballing the bottom line and weighing the costs of a public-relations disaster; sometimes, it plays in a discordant, Armageddon-ish comic register, as when klutzy astrophysicist Donald Glover slips on his spilled coffee. (As for the distracting presence of Kristen Wiig, let's just say her role is brief enough to be a skit on SNL.) But mainly, The Martian strikes an invigorating note of let's-work-the-problem cool, bringing in the Chinese space program for a utopian assist, and saluting a little insubordination as Jessica Chastain’s guilt-ridden orbiting commander decides to go rogue in an explosive finale. A movie about intellect triumphing over fear, loneliness and an all-disco playlist (the only tunes Watney is left with by his departing cohorts), it gets the mind racing.







The very best Pixar films aren’t just children’s movies with references and touchstones to keep the adults interested; they’re ambitious, complex, deeply layered movies for grown-ups that happen to be populated with characters, colors and primary stories that appeal to children as well.

Who chokes up more at certain scenes from the “Toy Story” movies or “Finding Nemo” or “Up” — first-graders, or their parents and grandparents, who can fully relate to and understand what’s happening on all levels?

The very best Pixar films aren’t just children’s movies with references and touchstones to keep the adults interested; they’re ambitious, complex, deeply layered movies for grown-ups that happen to be populated with characters, colors and primary stories that appeal to children as well.

Who chokes up more at certain scenes from the “Toy Story” movies or “Finding Nemo” or “Up” — first-graders, or their parents and grandparents, who can fully relate to and understand what’s happening on all levels?

So it is with “Inside Out,” a bold, gorgeous, sweet, funny, sometimes heartbreakingly sad, candy-colored adventure that deserves an Academy Award nomination for best picture.

Not just in the animated category — in the big-kid section, right there with the top-tier live-action films. It’s one of the best movies of the year, period.

Based on an original idea by Pete Docter (“Up,” “Monsters, Inc.”) and co-directed by Docter and Ronaldo Del Carmen, “Inside Out” does a wonderful job of laying out the groundwork for the story to come in the opening sequences, in which a little girl named Riley (Kaitlyn Dias) is born in Minnesota and experiences the first few years of life.

We see Riley’s world through the emotions in her head — where we’ll be spending the bulk of the movie itself. (The story takes us outside Riley’s mind and into the “real” world just often enough for us to appreciate what she’s going through, and sometimes what her parents are feeling. It’s all done with a deft touch.)

Our narrator and tour guide is Joy (Amy Poehler, perfectly voice-cast and terrific throughout), a sort of a whirling, glowing Emoticon-Tinkerbell hybrid who introduces us to Riley’s other primary emotions, including:

• Sadness (Phyllis Smith from “The Office”), who can literally color memories forever simply by touching them.

• Fear (Bill Hader), who views every experience as potentially disastrous, but is sometimes a valuable asset.

• Anger (Lewis Black, of course!), ready to throw a tantrum whenever things don’t go Riley’s way.

• Disgust (Mindy Kaling), who, like the other emotions, has shades of other traits. (Disgust can be quite the little narcissist.)

At first things are pretty simple and straightforward for Baby Riley, as she experiences the Joy of parental love, Disgust when she tastes broccoli, Fear of noisy household appliances, etc., etc.

But then we jump forward to Riley’s world at age 11, when the family moves to San Francisco because her father has a new job opportunity — and Riley has to cope with everything from tension between her parents to living in a less-than-desirable neighborhood to missing her friends to feeling like an outcast at her new school.

Things are getting COMPLICATED inside Riley Central.

It’s like an animated “Wizard of Oz” adventure within Riley’s mind. Riley’s memories arrive in the form of color-coded orbs and are stored away. Some of her experiences become important, influential long-term memories; others are dumped into the vast wasteland of forgotten experiences. (That’s where we meet the discarded but still fiercely loyal Bing Bong, Riley’s imaginary friend from childhood, who is voiced by the invaluable Richard Kind. Oh, Bing Bong. He will melt your heart.)

As Riley becomes increasingly sad and resentful, Joy goes on a desperate quest to regain control or at least once again become a constant presence in Riley’s life, lest Disgust and Fear and Anger remain at the controls forever.

The Pixar animation team outdoes itself with vast, intricate, amazingly detailed landscapes ranging from the “movie studio” where Riley’s dreams are produced every night (with a sly nod to Hitchcock, among other filmmakers) to Riley’s long-term memory bank (she’s forgotten nearly all of her piano lessons, but an annoying jingle for chewing gum will be popping into her head forever) to the places where Riley’s subconscious and abstract thinking reside.

Not to mention the Train of Thought, which is literally a Train. Of Thought.

Pretty complicated fare for a Pixar film — or for any film, come to think of it — and viewers a few years younger than Riley’s 11 will probably get a little fidgety and a little frightened by some of the proceedings. (Let’s just say Riley’s primary nightmare is something to which nearly all of us can relate, regardless of age.) But even if some of the references go sailing over their heads, there’s such a visual feast in every frame of this film, it’s hard to imagine any child growing restless even during the darker and more complex passages.

Directed with great flair and pitch-perfect timing, brimming with sparkling visuals, filled with first-rate voice performances, thrilling adventures and unforgettable moments, “Inside-Out” is an instant classic.

Someday the children of the children who will love this film, will love this film.







In Avengers: Age of Ultron, the mega-superheroes are taken out of their usual hi-tech, urban surroundings and brought down to Earth when they hide out at a Midwestern farmhouse. It’s a scene that writer/director Joss Whedon had to fight to keep in the movie, and it’s one of the best.

In Marvel’s Ant-Man, the titular character (played by Paul Rudd) suffers an even more ignoble juxtaposition: He’s wearing his retro-cool, ’60s spacesuit-looking outfit in a bathroom. While he hides from his roommates behind a shower curtain, and suddenly shrinks down smaller than the tub stopper, running away from the water on filthy porcelain, trying not to get washed down the drain.

One of the biggest pleasures in the tonally challenged Ant-Man is its overall subversion of the superhero genre. The movie still feels like a Marvel product — and it suffers from a typically one-dimensional bad guy (Corey Stoll) — but it also has a lot of fun turning expectation on its head.

The irony of Ant-Man is that while its action scenes and characters feel small and insignificant in the larger picture of Marvel superheroes who consistently save the world, the piece of new technology introduced in the film couldn’t be bigger.

The “Pym particle,” named after its inventor Hank Pym (Michael Douglas), is a game–changer for the entire universe, and something Pym has been hiding from the military ever since trying it out himself in secret.

When his protege Darren Cross (Stoll) develops a suit called Yellowjacket some 25 years later and is eager to give it up to the highest bidder, Pym chooses a good man in a desperate situation to wear his original Ant-Man outfit and stop the sale.

That man is Scott Lang (Rudd), a hacker/cat burglar with a master’s degree in electrical engineering. After a brief stint in prison, he’s trying to “go straight” for his daughter but he can’t even keep a job at Baskin-Robbins.

He eventually gives up and plans a heist with a group of criminals specifically designed for comic relief. Rudd is his usual likable self, and he’s perfect for a role that requires a lot of exasperation. He’s an everyman that’s easy to root for from the get-go, and his droll sense of humor allows him to comment on the stranger goings-on with the appropriate amount of “WTF?”

The script for Ant-Man was written by original director Edgar Wright and his collaborator Joe Cornish, and then was re-written by Rudd and Adam McKay after Wright left the project. It’s full of Wright’s signature surreal comic touches, especially in the action scenes, which is where Ant-Man at once feels like an extension of and departure from the Marvel Cinematic Universe.

When it tries to explain things such as how Ant-Man can summon a colony of ants, Pied Piper-style, however, the script doesn’t really stick the landing. As Team America so eloquently put it: “We’re gonna need a montage!”

Reed has some trouble balancing the more ridiculous aspects of a character that most people wouldn’t go near, but that’s also part of the fun of Ant-Man. Marvel proved last year with a talking raccoon in Guardians of the Galaxy that the studio isn’t afraid to get weird, so it’s nice to see it still taking some chances.

What Ant-Man is missing that Guardians had is a certain level of confidence. Guardians established a smart-alecky tone from the get-go that was reinforced by those characters during their journey, while Ant-Man feels a little more all over the place.

Still, it’s refreshing to see a Marvel movie that has the opportunity to end with a big action climax in a sleek, hi-tech facility and then purposefully move away to a polar opposite environment. If you’ve seen the trailer, this part of the movie has probably already been given away, but I hadn’t, so I when Ant-Man fought Yellowjacket, I was giggling like a schoolboy throughout.





In the middle of the cacophony that is Mad Max: Fury Road —basically a two-hour assault on most of your senses including, but not limited to, sight, hearing and taste — it felt like the theatre patron behind me, driven into a frenzy of excitement, was kicking my seat in restless exhilaration.

After a few seconds, though, it was clear that my neighbor was sitting quietly, albeit on the edge of his seat, and the ground was shaking from the pounding noise of the movie, a 3D soundtrack of drumming, explosions, roaring vehicles, and piercing screams. With its steampunk violence and hazy surreality, Mad Max: Fury Road feels like what might happen if Kiss gave a concert in Sin City, and you were invited to watch it from the confines of one of the amplifiers.

That’s not to say it’s not thrilling. Director George Miller, who made the previous three Mad Max films, has reinvented the story — a cop makes his way through post-apocalyptic Australia — as a non-stop chase decorated with a bizarre collection of unique characters (a villain who wears a masque of death’s head teeth, warriors who dye their bodies white and spray paint silver on their mouths for that extra boost of violent adrenalin, a heroine with an artificial mechanical arm) and brilliantly choreographed mayhem.

“My world is fire and blood,” says Max in a prelude that includes most of his dialogue. Max is played by the great Tom Hardy, whose previous foray into action films was as Bane in The Dark Knight Rises, a character who wore a mask that muffled most of his dialogue. It’s his bad luck that Max is similarly bound: for the first half hour, he’s the prisoner of the insane dictator Immortan Joe (Hugh Keays-Byrne) who runs this arid world and dispenses what water there is (it’s called Aqua Cola). As such, Max is tied up, gagged and used as a source of blood transfusions for the troops.

Thus the first great visual shock of Mad Max, when our hero is chained to the front of one of the cars that is racing madly through the desert in pursuit of a war rig — an oil tanker that seems to be filled with mother’s milk, one of the premium drinks enjoyed by Immortal Joe — that is trying to escape from the madness. It’s driven by Furiosa (Charlize Theron), a cold-eyed warrior queen who has absconded with some of Joe’s wives and is heading toward a mythical land of green from her past. The wives, who sport various bits of diaphanous cloth, add a note of dystopic supermodel glamour to what is otherwise a fairly bloody-minded saga.

Max’s driver, to whom he is connected by transfusion tubes, is Nux (Nicholas Hoult), a loyal trouper who throws himself into the chase with insane enthusiasm. “What a lovely day it is,” he exclaims as all his dreams — saturated red flares in the dun-coloured sky, desert dust flying from the convoy of chase vehicles, bullets flying — are coming true.

The chase is one of several long sequences through a barren, computer-aided landscape that falls just this side of artificial. Several classes of fighters race after Max and Furiosa — whose fierceness seems to prove the notion that names are destiny — as they run away with the women. The highlights are the polecats, men on tall sticks that weave and bend as they sway high above the vehicles, dipping down occasionally to drop a bomb or be eviscerated.

Furiosa’s homeland is part of a feminist subtext in Mad Max: Fury Road, which allows the heroine to take over at key moments when lesser (and quieter) films would have them cowering behind their man. It’s one of the hints of a broader saga in all of this. Hardy’s Max is a more measured hero than the one played by Mel Gibson in the previous films — at the time, Gibson cornered the market in wild-eyed insanity — and he is haunted by shapes from the past, figures whom he has failed to save. In addition, some of the characters, such as an obese man in a business suit with an artificial metal nose, seem to demand some kind of explanation.

We’ll have to wait for the inevitable sequel to find out where it’s going. In the meantime, get yourself some earplugs.






It's easy to walk in with low expectations for "The Lego Movie," a film so saturated with product placement that every single scene doubles as a toy commercial. Adding to the cynicism is the early February release date, a time when quality family cinema is typically as plentiful as tulips on a freeway median.
The movie is a wonderful surprise, cleverly written and executed brick by brick with a visual panache. Filled with humor and action, the Warner Bros. movie pulls off an emotional finish that rivals some of Pixar's best work. You can argue - and not sound completely crazy - that this is a better film than a few recent Academy Awards best picture nominees.
There were early signs that "The Lego Movie" might rise above mediocrity. It was directed and written by Phil Lord and Chris Miller, who seem to specialize in stealthily making quality films, including the charming "Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs" and a satisfying film remake of "21 Jump Street." Lego has a history of nurturing the brand; the company's video games have mostly been excellent in recent years.
But the first big-screen animated Lego movie has the feel of a passion project - where smart people were given a lot of resources and allowed to execute the craziest thoughts that came to their head. "The Lego Movie" is a PG film, but its closest comparison is the work of "South Park" creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone. The single musical number, "Everything Is Awesome," is so effective, you'll wonder why Lord and Miller didn't make more.
"The Lego Movie" begins in the middle of a generic Lego city, where construction man Emmett (voiced by Chris Pratt) lives a lonely but upbeat life as one of the most boring Lego mini-figures. He is mistaken for a savior by love interest and rebel leader Wyldstyle, who is in a relationship with Batman.
(That love triangle is one of many insider nods for Lego-loving kids and adults. As anyone who has played with the toy can tell you, a construction worker is at the bottom of the Lego caste system, while only Lego Boba Fett is cooler than Lego Batman.)
As the friends work to save the city from the schemes of conformist tyrant Lord Business, the movie settles into a nice blend of sly rapid-fire humor and over-the-top action sequences that all seem hatched from a 9-year-old's imagination. With plastic brick people instead of flesh and blood, the filmmakers and skilled animators at effects studio Animal Logic get a bit of a pass on the violent and racy content. If a real-life construction worker gets beheaded, it's unspeakably gory. A man photocopying his naked butt is lowbrow and obscene. When these things happen in the Lego world, it's kind of cute.
Lord and Miller offer a lot for adults - from unexpected pop culture nods to a blink-and-you'll-miss-it joke about failed Lego play sets. But that humor is almost never patronizing. So many lazier family filmmakers have dropped a line from "Taxi Driver" or a double entendre, counting on the fact that the joke will sail over kids' heads. Part of the uniqueness of "The Lego Movie" is that children and their chaperones can enjoy it on pretty much the same level.
I felt a hint of worry about two-thirds of the way through the movie, realizing that the movie's high marks for style were not matched by its substance. For all its in-the-moment satire and entertainment, the lack of a human heart became harder and harder to ignore.
That's the last and best surprise from the makers of "The Lego Movie." We shall say no more, except that the emotional finish exceeds the pleasures of the unexpected ending in "Frozen." This is becoming a welcome trend in kid-friendly films: making sure the adults walk home smiling as well.





Out of all the horrifying titles I subjected myself to in 2014, no film boasted a more sinister persona than Jake Gyllenhaal’s turn as renegade videographer Louis Bloom in Dan Gilroy’s Nightcrawler. The actor digs deep and uncovers one of society’s most dangerous minds, yet he does so by hiding an unsettling psychopath underneath a cool, calm, and collected “anybody” who is five steps ahead of the game. He’s no Patrick Bateman, assimilating through charm and charisma, but Gyllenhaal’s sick puppeteering finds an even more evil level that a naked, chainsaw-swinging Bateman simply can’t compete with. It’s a shame that Gyllenhaal’s name isn’t being tossed around with the other deserving Oscar nominees, because the transformation he undertakes is no easy feat. Not since Elijah Woods’ leading role in Maniac have I been so horrified by one deceptively stable man.
Gilroy’s exploration of shock-ya journalism reveals a host of unsettling topics, but Gyllenhaal’s performance is much bigger than the social dissection being executed on screen. Louis Bloom (Gyllenhaal) is as vile as they come, but his unparalleled access to crime scenes and illegal actives becomes a bit suspect as the film embellishes upon itself. Bloom builds his reputation on always getting the most graphic first-access to fires, robberies, accidents – anything  that involves human suffering – but his increasingly illegal actions never balance out with proper repercussions.
Chalk it up to grit and determination, but Gilroy’s screenplay spins into an outlandish land where detectives can be outsmarted by some laptop editing and good-old-fashion moxie. For all the clever quips and hauntingly poignant remarks made about today’s sick viral obsession (YouTubers fighting for internet dominance by posting nothing but “fails” and morally horrendous content), a few ludicrous liberties are taken that lose what gritty realism Gyllenhaal attempts to establish.
Then again, this is Jake Gyllenhaal at his absolute best. Never has the actor been able to achieve such a layered dramatization, as Gilroy offers Gyllenhaal the chance to portray an underground Don of sorts with hints of neurosis, instability and improper guidance. Nightcrawler is strangely about making it in America through back-breaking work and blind ambition, but this embodiment is more an American nightmare thanks to Gyllenhaal’s paralyzing command over horrified audiences. Louis Bloom lures you in with a soft, socially awkward demeanor that makes him seem like a wounded animal, but his eyes reveal something dark – something unsettling. As Bloom becomes more brazen with his actions, dictating how he’s able to manipulate whoever he wants without even flinching, Gyllenhaal proves what a tour de force powerhouse he’s capable of being.
Bill Paxton, Rene Russo, and Riz Ahmed round out the main supporting cast, inserted as nothing but pawns in Bloom’s overarching game. That might be the most terrifying aspect of all – the way Gyllenhaal’s character toys with actual lives while never seeming to be bothered one iota. Take Paxton’s character Joe Loder for example. Being in direct competition with Bloom, it’s Loder who eventually finds himself with cameras being shoved in his own bleeding face after a suspicious accident. Or what about Russo’s show producer, Nina? Falling prey to Bloom’s shifty appearance, she finds herself paying exorbitant amounts of money to keep his video content exclusive. These are the moments where Gyllenhaal’s brilliance shines, as he’s able to seamlessly turn normal conversations into spiteful accusations and exploitative requests fueled only by personal gain.
While Nightcrawler becomes more of a inconceivable extreme than a desperate warning, Gilroy and cinematographer Robert Elswit are able to capture the pulse-pounding lifestyle of people like Louis Bloom in vibrant and energetic ways. As he whips around busy highways in a flashy new ride (how didn’t he ever get arrested?), the camera pans and cuts with the same ferocity found in Gyllenhaal’s beady eyes. For a film that takes place primarily in the dark, Elswit is able to present colorfully attractive imagery through blurred lights, gruesome accidents and focused framing, and the Blu-Ray provides an equally sleek watch in 1080p. Nightcrawler is dark, dismal, and grotesquely seedy, yet Gilroy is somehow able to romanticize such horrors by spinning them into a story about capturing the American dream – something Gyllenhaal ably turns into pure terror.
As for the Special Features, here’s what you’ll find lurking in the shadows:
If It Bleeds, It Leads: Making Nightcrawler
Feature Commentary With Dan Gilroy, Tony Gilroy, And John Gilroy
For all the possible extra features Nightcrawler could have contained, this Blu-Ray release is as bare-bones as they come. The only real featurette is a “Behind the Scenes” bit that splices some production feed with interviews from the film’s press tour, making for a short talking-heads segment. Gyllenhaal touches on how he saw Bloom as a coyote of sorts, picking at lifeless carcasses for his own survival, and we hear other cast/crew members talk about the transformation we witness on screen. We also meet the Raishbrooks – real “stringers” who helped Dan Gilroy understand the world of Nightcrawler from the perspective of two professionals in the game right now (who swear they’ve never done anything half as bad as Bloom). The segment is very light and airy though, and with nothing else but a commentary, there’s nothing extra that begs for your money.
Mix the charm of Jim Jones with the impishness of a Jehovah’s Witness, and you’ve got Louis Bloom. Drawing inspiration from the 20th-century photographer who started the profession, a man named Weegee, Gyllenhaal morphs into this sleazy creature of the night who preys on the weak for fame and fortune, extorting his way to the top. Louis Bloom is a modern day supervillain, whose greatest power is acting as a chameleon who appears chipper, cheery, and highly intelligent at first glance, but what hides underneath his clean-cut facade will chill you to the bone. Gyllenhaal is damn-near masterful in Nightcrawler, and while his antics are a little cartoonish, you’ll be hard-pressed to find a better sociopathic character in the last decade. All you have to do is look in his eyes and you’ll understand.






In Whiplash (Sony, Blu-ray, DVD, Digital HD, VOD), music competition is a bloodsport and J.K. Simmons’ instructor is as feared as he is respected. His Fletcher is the drill sergeant of Full Metal Jacket in a simple black t-shirt and slacks and head shaved to a hard sheen and his boot camp is the school’s competition stage band: the best of the best. He bullies his students into total obedience and fear and they are desperate to win his approval while he browbeats, humiliates, and even physically assaults them, none more so than the intense and driven Buddy Rich disciple Andrew (Miles Teller).

Teller is as fearless as Simmons, giving us an obsessive who is intense, driven, and at times insufferably arrogant and self-absorbed. He’s not very likable, at least not when he puts his drumming ahead of everything else, but he is compelling, taking the sports ethos of pushing past the pain to reach perfection. He literally bleeds for his art. Fletcher demands more through his hyena smile. He may actually believe that such tactics make better musicians (that which doesn’t kill only makes you a stronger player?) but he clearly enjoys the mind-games and emotional warfare. Simmons gives him life by playing it with cagey calculation, as if the very act of teaching is a competitive event.

This is as much psychological thriller as musical drama and it turns on the increasingly toxic chemistry between two clearly damaged people, to the exclusion of pretty much anyone else in the film. The other members of the band fade away as bystanders, object lessons, or seat-fillers and Andrew’s fleeting attempts at romance are all about how Fletcher’s influence infects him with the same emotional brutality. We never really get to know girl left wounded by his insensitivity. Such oversights allow the film to slip out of the real world and into a stylized arena of musical warfare but it works in the scheme of things. Writer / director Damien Chazelle has basically created a two-hander and that collision of ruthless ambition and ferocious control is riveting. The jazz band pieces, especially the title song “Whiplash,” give the film a brittle edge; these tunes aren’t played to express musical joy, they are designed to showcase musical precision, and the percussion-heavy element puts the film on edge as successfully as the drum solos in Birdman define the nervous tension of that film.

Blu-ray and DVD both feature commentary by filmmaker Damien Chazelle and co-star J.K. Simmons and a Q&A from the Toronto Film Festival screening with Chazelle, Simmons, and Miles Teller. Exclusive to the Blu-ray is the original short film Chazelle shot with Simmons to help fund the film (Simmons’ son plays the role that Teller essays in the feature), the 40-minute drumming documentary “Timekeepers,” and a deleted scene, plus an Ultraviolet Digital HD copy of the film. Also on Digital HD and cable and web VOD.






Big Hero 6 (Disney, Blu-ray, DVD, VOD) is an adaptation of a Marvel Comics title but the filmmakers thoroughly transform it into a Disney feature, complete with issues of loss and family at the center of the creation of a student superhero team, with the spark of Pixar in its visual invention and knowing wit. The comic book was set in Tokyo but this plays out in the futuristic city of San Fransokyo, where adolescent robotics prodigy Hiro discovers that his science fair invention has been turned into a weapon and then transforms his engineer brother’s plush medical bot, Baymax, into the cuddliest, sweetest, most protective crimefighter the world has ever seen. Together with his brother’s best friends and fellow engineering students, they form a team of what you might call science heroes, turning their inventions into superhero accessories.

In a stronger year Big Hero 6 might not have won the Oscar—it doesn’t have the timelessness or universality of the best Pixar movies or the elemental fairy tale resonance of Disney’s best—but there is no denying the art and heart of the film. Scott Adsit (of 30 Rock) voices the robot Baymax as a gentle nanny turned inflatable transformer, like a giant plush doll with the instinct of a caregiver and the mind of an overprotective child, a little slow on the uptake but utterly benevolent. That level of compassion is comforting amidst the flashy chaos of a superhero spectacle.

This disc actually offers two Oscar winners: Best Animated Short Feast, which played in front of the film in theaters, is included as a supplement. It also offers two featurettes—”The Origin Story of Big Hero 6: Hiro’s Journey,” which follows the process of adaptation process from comic book to animate feature, and “Big Animator 6: The Characters Behind the Characters,” with the animators discussing the evolution of the characters on the screen—deleted scenes (in rough form, as they were removed in early stages of production; you can see one of them at the end of the post), and Easter Eggs for the kids to hunt for. The Blu-ray also features bonus DVD and Digital HD copies of the film.







Solomon Northup, a black man from upstate New York, went to sleep on an April night in 1841 in Washington, D.C. - well-fed, albeit woozy, having just dined in the company of two affable gentlemen who had offered to pay good wages for him to play his violin. When he woke the next morning, Northup was shackled, in a dungeon a few streets from the Capitol. He had been drugged and abducted and was about to be smuggled south, to be sold into slavery.

When he insisted he was a free man, with a wife and children back in Saratoga Springs, he was beaten. And beaten again. It was the beginning of a nightmare odyssey, and it is the beginning of Steve McQueen's remarkable 12 Years a Slave.

A tale of impossible cruelty and incredible survival, this essential piece of filmmaking embodies, in microcosm, the long and shameful chapter of American history, when men, women, and children, because of the color of their skin, were oppressed, commodified, abused. It speaks to the courage and resilience of one man, the savagery of many, and the potential, for both good and for ill, in us all.

If that's not enough, it's just darn good storytelling, a picture made with impeccable artistry and intelligence, and with actors - Chiwetel Ejiofor foremost among them - who bring these heroes and villains, innocents and malefactors, to life, wholly, and sometimes horrifically. Michael Fassbender, McQueen's star in Hunger and Shame, plays Edwin Epps, the third of Northup's owners - a bitter man who lords over his Louisiana plantation, quoting scripture and whipping the slaves who do not do his bidding, or do not meet the daunting quotas of cotton they must pick.

It is shocking to think that apart from a handful of blaxploitation titles - and Quentin Tarantino's jokey, off-key take on that genre, Django Unchained - the subject of slavery, from the perspective of the enslaved, has never really been addressed on-screen before. McQueen, the black British director, remedies this failing, fearlessly.

Adapting Northup's 1853 memoir, McQueen and screenwriter John Ridley take the viewer down a surreal rabbit hole into a world of injustice, where the established social order is completely out of whack - and nobody, except the human chattel, seems to notice.

Ejiofor, who played the Royal Navy interpreter in Steven Spielberg's slave mutiny film Amistad (that legal case reached the U.S. Supreme Court in 1841, the same year Northup was kidnapped), gives body and soul to his role in 12 Years a Slave. Beaming great pride and dignity as the story begins, Northup is beaten down - and, in one gut-turning scene, strung up in a noose, left to hang. As he goes from disbelief and outrage to resignation and regret - from a determination to win freedom to merely a determination to survive - the change in Northup, whose slave name is Platt, is palpable.

The supporting roles, from the mercenary trader played by Paul Giamatti, to the morally compromised plantation owner played by Benedict Cumberbatch, to Lupita Nyong'o's slave girl (the object of Epps' admiration), to Paul Dano's bullying, small-minded overseer, are all top tier, memorable. Brad Pitt, wearing an Amish-style beard, is Samuel Bass, a carpenter from Canada who comes to work on the Epps plantation - sharing the screen with Ejiofor, and then Fassbender. Pitt delivers the movie's most transparently reflective dialogue - Bass is the movie's conscience, our collective conscience - and he does so, while hammering nails and raising beams, with a down-home grace and gravity.

McQueen, using a clanging score by Hans Zimmer, interwoven with fiddle jigs and spirituals, favors long takes, surveying the landscape, the faces, the bodies doing hard labor in the Southern heat. There are images that have the formal composition of old daguerreotypes. And the period details, the clothes, the houses, ring with authenticity.

At the same time, as we follow Solomon Northup on his harrowing journey, it all feels immediate, urgent. "Your story, it is amazing," Bass says to Northup, "and in no good way."

12 Years a Slave is history, but it resonates, in profound ways, in the here and now.




Between the sensational, career-defining performance by Robin Weigert in the lesbian-themed Concussion and the galvanizing one given by Sandra Bullock in the crowd-pleasing Gravity, it's not just a great week for women at the cinema—it's an extraordinary one.
Out writer-director Stacie Passon based her relationship drama, Concussion, on an incident that happened to her in real life. Unlike Passon, when upper-middle-class New Jersey housewife Abby ( Weigert ) gets hit in the head with a baseball by her son, the accident has the effect of awakening her to the realization that she's not just bored with life in the suburbs—she's middle-aged crazy about it. Sex with her pretty but distracted career-oriented wife Kate ( Julie Fain Lawrence ) is perfunctory at best; shuttling the kids to and from their various lessons, the drudgery of housekeeping chores and the infrequent get-togethers with the neighbors is Dullsville deluxe.

Through a set of circumstances that aren't quiet believable ( but, hey, it's a movie ), Abby's renovation of a Manhattan loft, a project that alleviates some of her routine boredom, leads to her spending afternoons as a high priced lesbian escort she dubs Eleanor. If this sounds like a lesbian-themed Belle du Jour with more than a dash of Diary of a Mad Housewife and the recent Afternoon Delight thrown in, that's because it should. That's to remind audiences that Passon's film—which was produced by Rose Troche of the queer cinema classic Go Fish—is in good company.

It's also more than a little refreshing to have a lesbian character explore her sexual desires exclusively with other women. I get that gender boundaries can ebb and flow given the situation ( something that Afternoon Delight briefly explored and The Kids Are All Right at length ) but Abby's firm stance to Justin, her handsome handyman/quasi-pimp ( nicely underplayed by the hunky Johnathan Tchaikovsky ), about only accepting female clients felt like a small but important victory at the movies for Our People.

And what a sensational crop of women! Abby—as essayed by Weigert makes 42 seem like the new 20 ( talk about sensual allure )—doesn't hesitate once she begins bedding the various women that Justin finds for her. Meeting each woman first for coffee allows Abby ( and the audience ) to take the emotional temperature of her clients, who range from a shy, overweight, grad student to a tattooed sexual barracuda to a hesitant businesswoman. When one of the housewives from Abby's circle shows up, the movie goes even deeper into questions of fidelity versus freedom.

Concussion is a very subtle, sophisticated take on modern relationships driven, naturally, by Weigert's nuanced, hard edged performance. Abby isn't easy to warm up to and Weigert isn't afraid to let the bitterness and cynicism show through, even as she's expressing her loneliness and frustration. She's a really complex woman and Weigert gifts her with full dimensionality.

The film's one misstep is in not changing the defining incident of the head injury, which seems to lead directly to Abby turning into the sexually voracious Eleanor. It's uncomfortably close to A Dirty Shame, John Waters' comedic film that used a similar experience as its starting point. That's unfortunate, as the two films could not be more different, and it should be discounted before seeing Concussion. The film is playing in theaters in New York and LA and is available in Chicago either through VOD or iTunes.

Sandra Bullock—our latter-day June Allyson-Doris Day, girl-next-door movie star who defines "niceness" in cinema—is back in a big way. After kicking butt at the box office this summer with co-star Melissa McCarthy in the predictable but crowd-pleasing The Heat, Bullock is once again going to earn her reported multimillion-dollar salary with Gravity.

Alfonso Cuaron's film, which he co-wrote with his son Jonas, is surely going to join the ranks as one of the greatest man-versus-nature movies in cinematic history. And Bullock's performance is similarly going to be cherished right along with it. The movie's storyline couldn't be more familiar—a lone individual facing the harsh elements must race against the clock to stay alive. But in setting this always welcome plotline in space, Cuaron literally expands its horizons to jaw-dropping proportions. It's one thing to be stuck in the wilderness ( 127 Hours ), marooned on a desert isle ( Cast Away ) or lost in the Alaskan tundra ( Into the Wild ) but pit those puny expanses with the vastness of outer space and you begin to get the idea.

At Gravity's outset Bullock's Dr. Ryan Stone, a medical engineer, is on her first space shuttle mission. Six hundred thousand feet above the earth's surface, she and her fellow astronaut, veteran Matt Kowalski ( George Clooney ), and a third officer are outside the shuttle walking in space when debris from a Russian satellite crash slams into them, sending them hurtling into the eerie, silent void. The debris knocks out other satellites, preventing any communication with earth and the possibility of a rescue. It's up to the survivors to figure out a way to save themselves.

Fifteen minutes in and with all stories of this ilk, Cuaron has his audience wondering where the heck we'll go from here. The range of emotions that Bullock's terrified Ryan goes through in the next 75 minutes mirrors the obstacle course she'll be forced to face down as the movie plays itself out. ( The character's increasingly desperate situation aptly recalls Thelma Ritter's famous line in All About Eve: "Everything but the bloodhounds snappin' at her rear end." )

Bullock's compelling performance and Clooney's typical warm, reassuring one are supported by the seamless, dazzling special effects. The movie—shot digitally by Emmanuel Lubezki—is stunning visually, filled with elegant, long tracking shots, judicious though emotive close-ups and awe-inspiring wide-angle shots. ( It's a must see at the IMAX. ) Considering those visuals, Steven Price's eloquent yet simple musical score is almost another character.

Gravity is that rare movie that can truly be called a cinematic experience—a breathtaking one. Robert Redford is set to perform the same man-versus-nature trick in the forthcoming All Is Lost, where he is adrift at sea in a sailboat. Won't it be a delicious irony if both he and Bullock are found in the winner's circle come Oscar time?
