There's a lot to like about Disney's "Tomorrowland." It's got George Clooney and Hugh Laurie, robots and explosions, a positive message, and it puts the fate of the future in the hands of two smart young girls.

Still, it's hard to say exactly who the audience is for this packed-to-the-brim, sci-fi/action-adventure/family romp. The story is nostalgic for a more hopeful time half a century ago, there's some serious robot violence, yet its overly earnest tone seems aimed at little kids.

It starts at the 1964 New York World's Fair, where 11-year-old Frank has come to show off the jet pack he built. He meets Athena (Raffey Cassidy, who steals the movie), an enigmatic young girl who takes him to Tomorrowland — a futuristic place that exists in another dimension, where all the great thinkers have gathered to make the world more harmonious and more fun.

Fast forward to present day and the focus is on Casey (Britt Robertson), an idealistic teenager fascinated with space exploration. One day she receives a mysterious pin that allows her to glimpse Tomorrowland. She, too, meets Athena, who introduces her to Frank (Clooney), now a grumpy recluse who lives in a fortified house far from town.

Grown-up Frank is bitter and disillusioned about the future. His home is filled with digital toys and space-age gadgets, but also dozens of TV screens flashing constant images of war, starvation, fires and floods. Casey pleads with him to take her to Tomorrowland. He's unmoved, until a team of killer robots on Casey's tail inspire him to change his mind. (Their escape in a rocket-launched bathtub is awesome.)

The 'bots were apparently dispatched by Nix (Laurie), a scientist who lives in Tomorrowland but has lost faith in his fellow human beings' will to change the world. While Frank and Nix butt heads in a disappointment-fueled battle, it's up to Casey and Athena to save Tomorrowland and the future.

Robertson is delicious to watch, and Cassidy is a force. Clooney and Laurie each bring a predictably crowd-pleasing presence. And there are delightful, smaller performances throughout, including Judy Greer as a doomsday-minded schoolteacher and Kathryn Hahn and Keegan-Michael Key as the intense, offbeat owners of a comic-book shop.

There are also some eye-popping action sequences. Franks house goes into safety mode like a modern-day "Get Smart," and the Eiffel Tower splits in two to launch a rocket from its center.

Director Brad Bird and co-writer Damon Lindelof have created an original, aspirational story that pays homage to Walt Disney's imaginative concepts of the future. The "It's a Small World" ride, which Disney actually created for the 1964 World's Fair, even plays a role. The film's take on Tomorrowland's sloping, floating landscape — complete with airborne monorail — looks like something Disney himself could have dreamt up.

Bird and Lindelof have both said they were inspired by Disney's optimism about the future, particularly contrasted against today's apparent apathy, which Bird characterized as a "giant cosmic shrug."

But they get a little preachy and heavy-handed in the film. Most people understand that war, overpopulation and climate change are human-caused realities that endanger life on this planet, and that it's better to try to improve things than to give up entirely. Yet, although everyone can use a pep talk, "Tomorrowland" repeats the message again and again, to the point of platitude.

"In every moment, there's a possibility for a better future," Nix says. "But you people won't do it."

Nor will politicians or captains of industry, he says: "All they want is to keep the wheels greased and the dollars rolling in."

Are you listening, kids?

"Tomorrowland," a Walt Disney Pictures release, is rated PG by the Motion Picture Association of America for "sequences of sci-fi action violence and peril, thematic elements, and language." Running time: 130 minutes. Two and a half stars out four.






Well, he said he’d be back.

 

And indeed, Arnold Schwarzenegger has returned as the world’s favourite time-travelling robot assassin: a little greyer now — he’s known as Pops — a lot older (“but not obsolete,” he keeps reminding people) and still speaking with that never-explained Austrian accent that has marked Schwarzenegger’s career as both an unlikely movie star and an even less likely politician.

 

He’s part of the nostalgia trip called Terminator Genysis, the fifth movie in an over-muscled movie franchise that started as an ingenious action noir about time travel and has now become a vehicle for explosions and old body-builders. Genysis is itself an exercise in time travel, a trip back to pick up some bits and pieces of the previous movies and throw them together with a lot of special effects to make a new story that’s just like the old ones except, you know, crappier.

 

Schwarzenegger — the fearsome Terminator in the first film, the heroic guardian in the second — has become a supporting character. He is a bit of comic relief who variously battles other robots, smiles with a patently false grin designed to parody his non-human coldness (not to mention Schwarzenegger’s acting range), and to ask the heroine if she’s ready to mate with the leading man, a question that is key to the logic of the Terminator saga. The accent is just a bonus.

 

Genysis is Terminator redux for much of its two-hour running time. The story has become as familiar as a fairy tale: a computer program called Skynet has taken over the world and machines have almost conquered mankind. But human rebels, led by John Connor (Jason Clarke) fight back and use a time machine to send John’s trusted lieutenant Kyle Reese — which sounds like “calories” in Schwarzenegger’s reading — back to sabotage Skynet before it can get started.

 

Reese, played by Aussie hunk Jai Courtney, is the real star of Terminator Genysis. He lands in 1984 Los Angeles and teams up with John’s mother Sarah Connor (Emilia Clarke, who doesn’t hold a candle to the original Sarah, Linda Hamilton.) Together with Schwarzenegger, they fight through time and a lot of memories to save the world.

 

Terminator Genysis is littered with references to the earlier Terminator movies, including that policeman made of liquid metal who can reconstitute himself from a silver puddle, an effect that was a lot cooler when we were surprised by it. There’s even a computer-generated figure of a younger Schwarzenegger who arrives, with all his Mr. Universe muscles intact, just in time to have his block knocked off by the older, fully dressed version.

 

Like much of this summer’s menu of big-budget films, Terminator Genysis is to a large extent a salute to the past, as well as a way of cannibalizing a proven idea for another box office bonanza. It walks familiar ground, and its few surprises come at the expense of the time-travel logic that made the first two movies — the James Cameron ones — sci-fi classics. People go back and forth at random, while Schwarzenegger’s character drones on amusingly about “a nexus in the time flow,” or something. At one point, Kyle Reese talks about who John Conner was, or is, or will be: his confusion is woven into the screenplay to cover up the narrative carelessness.

 

When all else fails, someone grabs a giant firearm and blows a hole in one someone else, although it doesn’t mean much because all the robots can heal themselves, at least until they can’t. It’s presented with a giant wink, represented by the character actor J.K. Simmons — last seen to much more useful effect in Whiplash — as a cop whose rants about time-travelling robot assassins have made him the laughing stock of the police department. Wait until they get a load of Arnold Schwarzenegger.






Hollywood has been in the mass disaster business since at least the Irwin Allen movies of the 1970s, and the genre’s fixation on capturing massive devastation has even earned it the nickname “disaster porn.” But San Andreas, directed by Brad Peyton (Journey 2: The Mysterious Island), represents a new benchmark in destructive realism. It purports to depict what would happen to Los Angeles and San Francisco if the titular California fault line cracked the state asunder in the biggest earthquakes in recorded history. Below, BuzzFeed Senior Film Reporter Adam B. Vary, who lives in L.A., and BuzzFeed Film Critic Alison Willmore, who grew up in the Bay Area, talk about why the film’s approach to this event left them feeling more disturbed than entertained.

Adam B. Vary: Setting aside for the moment that it’s likely impossible for the San Andreas fault line to create earthquakes of quite that magnitude, Peyton treats these seismic events straightforwardly, tasking his visual effects teams with rendering them with shuddering, rubble-strewn verisimilitude. He wants us to think, This is how this could — how it will — really happen.

Alison, as a 13-year resident of L.A. — basically my entire adult life — I’ve lived with the quiet but persistent knowledge that The Big One could hit my home at any time. And I found watching my home get pummeled during that very event as a form of popcorn-y summer entertainment to be a deeply unpleasant experience. It’s as if The Impossible, about the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, had opened in May with a splashy red carpet premiere and starred a sprawling cast that included Channing Tatum and a cameo by Rihanna. But I can be overly sensitive about such things. So I’m wondering, as someone who grew up in California, if you think I’m getting worked up over nothing?

Alison Willmore: I did grow up in the Bay Area, which has been pummeled on-screen recently — San Francisco is in ruins in Dawn of the Planet of the Apes and gets trampled by kaiju in Godzilla. But that’s nothing compared to what happens in San Andreas, in which San Francisco is leveled by massive earthquakes, then catches on fire, then is hit by a giant tsunami. Los Angeles takes it on the chin as well, but man, does this movie have it out for San Francisco. I was in elementary school when the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake took place, and it definitely evokes some of the footage that looped on TV back then — especially the freeway and bridge collapses. That said, for me, this movie didn’t take much time escalating from realistic depiction of a disaster to giant, numbing CGI spectacle, so any actual quake-related fears I’ve had, most of them revolving around getting smooshed by the crumbling of whatever building I was in, faded into the background very quickly.

As you said, Adam, Hollywood has a long history of disaster movies, but what irked me about San Andreas — beyond the way it managed to make even my beloved Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson dull — is the lousy balance it maintained between its mass destruction and its relatable characters. You mentioned The Impossible, a movie that, for all its impressive filmmaking and acting, also inadvertently suggested that audiences needed a set of white characters in order to care about a Thai disaster. And I felt like San Andreas turned that into a grander screenwriting problem — in attempting to inject some smaller drama into widescale wreckage, it ends up making it feel like California was devastated and millions of people were killed in order to get the Rock’s family back together.

ABV: That disconnect is what was so disquieting to me, I think. L.A. has also certainly had its share of cinematic calamity. In 2012, the city literally cracked apart in a fantastical doomsday event; the aliens of Independence Day seemed to relish their plan to lay waste to the city (as well as to New York and Washington, D.C.); and I don’t think anyone will forget that fateful day in 2013 when a shark tornado took a bite out of Santa Monica. In all of those movies, the disasters were so outlandish — and the acting and dialogue often so enjoyably terrible — that you would be missing the point entirely if you tried to place yourself inside them. These movies are meant as engines for escapism, not empathy.

But San Andreas wants to deliver its pulpy fun with scenarios that feel genuinely plausible, like getting trapped in a car in an underground parking structure or impaled by falling glass or, yes, caught in a tsunami. The good-bad elements from other disaster movies were in ready supply — including Kylie Minogue’s blink-and-you’ll-miss-her-falling-out-of-a-building cameo — but I derived no pleasure from them. The actors played their scenes so straight, and, you’re right, the Rock’s family drama was so bland, that California’s devastation became the only thing worth paying attention to. So I just kept thinking, Yeah, something like this might actually happen to me. And when things finally did get over the top, like the Rock dodging a giant container ship as it crests over the lip of that aforementioned tsunami, it just felt that much more callous and hollow to me.

Like I said, I’m sensitive. But I’m also trying to figure out which is more frustrating: being jolted out of a silly disaster movie because the disaster feels too real, or numbly enjoying a disaster movie’s bloodless PG-13 death and expensive CG rubble because it feels too implausible to be real?

AW: It does feel to me like every other big movie ends with a city getting destroyed these days. San Andreas is a bit of a throwback in that this now happens more often in superhero battles than by way of natural disasters, but there’s a point where it all looks like the same big pile of wreckage that was artfully created on a computer somewhere. Honestly, I’m more bothered by the callousness to spectacle this has created in me than the potential exploitation of real resonance in a spectacle meant for entertainment. I remember feeling a jolt of unease the first time I saw Cloverfield and its early scenes evoking 9/11, but I think it ultimately made the movie stronger — the monster in Godzilla, after all, began as an embodiment of Japan’s fears of nuclear weapons after World War II, so why wouldn’t this creature terrorizing New York recall the terrorist attack that forever changed the city?

But the bloodlessness in San Andreas is fascinating. The movie kills off millions of people in California alone. The earth buckles, skyscrapers crumble, the ocean comes pouring into the streets. But for all the death, it’s dramatically free of dead bodies, something that really comes through in a later sequence in which characters navigate a boat across floodwaters that should be just cluttered with corpses. Instead, San Francisco looks dramatically empty, as if everyone had been neatly Left Behind–style raptured right before the wave hit, freeing the movie up to focus on its Alexandra Daddario rescue efforts. (Paul Giamatti’s professor character does issue a warning, but the fuzzy timeline doesn’t suggest nearly enough time to evacuate an entire city.) It actually made me think of Avengers: Age of Ultron, which, unlike some other recent comic book–inspired flicks, went out of its way in its own city-smashing sequence to show civilians being rescued and ushered out of danger. San Andreas doesn’t spare these people, but it does make their remains disappear. But what do you think of these halfway measures, Adam? Does the abstraction of body count in big-screen destruction like this make it more disturbing or less?

ABV: Oh, more disturbing, so much more disturbing. I mean, there’s even a disturbing thoughtlessness to this movie’s outwardly heartwarming story of a family reuniting — the Rock’s character rescues people for a living, and yet he doesn’t think twice about flying, in a rescue helicopter, over thousands of people desperately needing rescue, so he can maybe rescue his daughter in San Francisco.

You know, I think you’ve helped clarify for me why San Andreas put me into such a foul mood. It wasn’t just that it reminded me that I’m basically doomed; it was that it reminded me how fucked up it is that we treat mass death as a form of frivolous entertainment. Todd VanDerWerff at Vox recently wrote about how superhero movies over the last 15 years or so have increasingly been post-9/11 allegories. But, like you noted with Cloverfield, disaster porn movies like 2012, last year’s Godzilla remake, and San Andreas also qualify as a kind of twisted variation on the events of that day. But after surviving San Andreas, I’m not sure I will be able to find much pleasure anymore in such merciless catastrophe.





Pixels is about how Adam Sandler saves the world from invading aliens using the skills and know-how he picked up playing arcade games.
As premises go, it isn’t more outlandish than those of Sandler’s other movies, in which he’s played the favorite son of Satan, a guy able to control time using a magic remote control, and, nightmarishly, his own twin sister. Sandler has been turning out the high-concept, low-commitment comedies for two-plus decades, even though he seems less engaged each time — we’re a long way from the anarchic energy of Happy Gilmore and Billy Madison. And there are scenes in the surreally lazy, occasionally funny Pixels in which Sandler’s face slips into the exact same weary, disgruntled expression he wears in Funny People, in which he played a comedian trying to distance himself from the broad, inane films that made him famous.
The idea of extraterrestrials attacking in video game form is more than just a viral video concept that’s been inflated into Sandler’s latest pean to arrested development. It’s having a moment, courtesy of how Pixels has intersected with the release of Ernest Cline’s Armada earlier this month, a book with a strikingly similar premise. But where Pixels uses its setup of grown arcade rats as unlikely heroes for comedic action, sending Pac-Man rampaging through Manhattan and offering up a cowering Q*bert as a prisoner of war, Armada is very serious about how its 18-year-old protagonist Zack Lightman becomes humanity’s savior using the skills he’s built up over years of obsessive gaming.

Armada is the second novel from Cline, the author of the best-selling nerd tome Ready Player One and one of the screenwriters of Fanboys. It is a work of earnest, exhausting fandom that ties itself into influences and predecessors like Ender’s Game and Star Wars with the care of an academic tract. Pixels, directed by Mrs. Doubtfire’s Chris Columbus and co-written by frequent Sandler collaborator Tim Herlihy, is more like a bro in nerd’s clothing, offering up a shrugging barrage of ’80s references in hopes some will stick.
And yet, both end up doing the same maddening thing, which is find the point where geeky affirmation becomes barefaced pandering, and blow right past it. These are not stories about how underdog nerds save the world. They are stories in which world destruction has been carefully arranged to give its heroes a chance to prove themselves special.
Both Pixels and Armada are clear on how their protagonists’ gaming skills haven’t yielded real-life benefits. Brenner, the character Sandler plays in Pixels, made it to the 1982 arcade world championships before losing out to a preening, mulleted guy who’s played as an adult by a very entertaining Peter Dinklage. As a grown-up himself, Brenner is divorced, installs home electronics, and isn’t even a gamer anymore — but he still declares himself a nerd when he gets turned down by a customer, Violet (poor Michelle Monaghan), whom he labels a snob. “I’m an amazing kisser. All us nerds are, because we appreciate it more,” he tells her.
Violet, not long after this, is revealed to be a DARPA scientist, which by any classical definition would make her the nerd, and an apparent genius one at that, given her convenient ability to whip out anti-alien weapons in little to no time. But Pixels is not about genuine nerdiness as it might pertain to someone smart, shy, or with obsessive interests. When Brenner uses that term, what he means is that he’s someone who doesn’t feel appropriately appreciated for who he is — that he knows he’s great, and Violet should kiss him even though he admits he didn’t bother to brush his teeth that morning.

As the movie unfolds, and as the aliens arrive, having interpreted the contents of an ’80s NASA time capsule as a declaration of war, Brenner gets to not just be the hero but to be the man lecturing Navy SEALs on the nuances of Asteroids and getting toasted by a bar full of soldiers. “I’ve never been happier or more alive,” he yells while shooting his way through a giant version of Centipede. He, Eddie (Dinklage), and Ludlow (Josh Gad) get custom uniforms; a gala is thrown in their honor in between alien attacks; Eddie demands Serena Williams as his date — and gets her! “I’m just a loser who’s good at old video games,” Brenner says, as the universe he’s in assures him this is the most important thing he could possibly be.
Zack from Armada is, unlike Brenner, still a teenager, though he’s also mired in ’80s pop culture ephemera, thanks to his obsession with the father he never knew. Zack’s eponymous game of choice is a space combat simulator at which he’s become good enough to earn a top ten spot, of which he’s proud while admitting the time he’s put in has hurt his grades and cost him his girlfriend. Like Brenner, Zack is recruited and immediately promoted above actual soldiers when the aliens attack. He gets a nifty uniform of his own (“I actually looked pretty sharp, like an intrepid young space hero”), and while there’s little time for galas in Armada, which has a much higher body count than Pixels, he arrives at base to find his favorite snacks (Lucky Charms, no milk) already laid out for him.
Like Brenner, Zack knows better than the military leaders he clashes with, and also like Brenner (“We Will Rock You”), Zack (“Another One Bites The Dust,” “One Vision”) takes his gaming soundtrack with a lot of Queen. The two have no interest in making games, which just emphasizes it’s not authorship or the industry they’re interested in — it’s being the best at playing. They’re both convinced they’re destined for greater things, even if Brenner has longer to wait.

Pixels and Armada are descendants of movies like The Last Starfighter and War Games, Armada explicitly so. But they flail against an absence of oppression. Neither Sandler’s movie nor Cline’s book can really muster up an argument for its main character as a misunderstood representative from a maligned subculture, because both are set in a modern world in which gaming is a billion-dollar industry and a mainstream form of entertainment. Armada does cough up one ’80s-style bully who calls Zack a “videogame nerd who can’t get laid,” but the story quickly counters this claim by having a military aircraft land on school grounds in front of all Zack’s classmates (including his ex) to zip him away to training, where he immediately bags a fantasy girl won over by his in-game rankings.
It’s a moment in which the underlying sentiment in Armada as well as Pixels shines through, and it’s not actually one of geek affirmation or nerd triumph — an inarguable point in our age of Comic Con and Marvel movies, in which we’re all some degree of nerdy. No, it’s a more ordinary and less inclusive sort of wish fulfillment, that streak of “someday you’ll be sorry” that has nothing specific to do with being a gamer or being a geek and everything to do with the feeling of deserving more respect and appreciation.

It’s a recognizable human sentiment, if an unpretty one, that desire to be celebrated and rewarded for some hidden greatness that’s going unrecognized — greatness that, in the case of Pixels and Armada, the main characters have conveniently achieved in their own time, the work already done. Genre fiction is filled with underdog characters who manage heroics, but those stories are about what they go on to do, strengths they find, journeys they make, the things they achieve, not the indulged hobbies they already have. Maybe it’s time to give this self-congratulatory idea a rest — at least until we’re ready for a story in which the only person who can save the world is one with an unprecedented ability to mainline multiple seasons of Buffy the Vampire Slayer on Netflix in a single sitting, living only off of pints of Häagen-Dazs. Then sign me up.




The summer romance Paper Towns is now on Blu-ray and digital, and I’m sorry I waited until now to review it. Now months have gone by with kids thinking this is cool and getting the wrong messages from it. Movies have long been filling our heads with notions of wild card free spirits rescuing us from our humdrum existences, but the good ones either fall into healthy fantasy or true personal growth. Paper Towns is messed up from the beginning.

Margo (Cara Delevigne) and Quentin (Nat Wolff) have been neighbors since they were kids. On one of their first outings together, they found the body of a suicide victim. Since I know that this movie ends up with Q and Margo having a teenage adventure that makes him search for her, so this raises a huge red flag.

Clearly Margo was traumatized by seeing the bloody suicide victim so that explains her erratic behavior throughout her teenage years. Instead, she’s idealized for having adventures like traveling with the circus as a kid or with a band as a teenager. Neither of those are my fantasies, but if they are yours there are healthy ways to achieve them.

I get having an adventure to escape the boredom of high school suburbia. However, Margo’s idea that happiness only comes from rebellion clearly speaks to a broken home, even if the movie hadn’t revealed childhood trauma. Actually, we see Margo’s parents once, and they get it. They’ve maybe given up now that she’s 18 but they’re still together so I guess my broken home theory needs work. Well, someone let her go off with the circus as a toddler so that ain’t healthy.

Basically, Margo is just the superficial cliche of anti-authoritarian rebellion. She doesn’t even obey the rules of spelling and capitalizes middle letters of words. Random capitalization is all she has. She’s so desperate to be original she doubles down on nonsense. I’m confident my thoughts and character will make more impact than some artificial reworking of linguistics. Saran wrapping a car is clever, I will give her that.

Break out of your comfort zone, yes. That’s called growth. Being irresponsible is just acting out. And this is just the first act of the movie, so since the movie already lost me at Margo, spending the rest of the movie looking for her was a slog. But let’s say Margo even was a healthy muse for Quentin. You know what else is good? NOT being abandoned!

I know the point is we shouldn’t idealize people. That is a healthy lesson for young audiences to learn, and the only way to get there is to begin with a broad idealization. I’m being extra tough, because the ideal of Paper Towns shouldn’t feel ideal to anyone in the first place. We should value support, surround ourselves with people we can count on to be there and let go of abandoners from our lives.

Clearly Paper Towns spoke to a generation. For them the blu ray looks gorgeous. It is sharply clear and bright, but also stark with real world colors so the abandonment feels more palpable to me. The distant lights of Orlando nights light up the screen in HD.

Given my feelings on the film I hope you’ll forgive me for not spending additional time listening to the commentary or watching the behind the scenes extras. I did watch the deleted scenes which include a nice moment between Quentin and his mom and some more scenes on the road trip. An alternate scene has the boys sing “Shake it Off” instead of “Pokemon,” which for some reason only felt more insufferable to me.

Any film is open to interpretation and I’m sure Paper Towns left some people wishing they could have a Margo for just one night, and others feeling validated that they’d outgrown their Margos. Whether you’re stuck on a Margo or you are Margo, you deserve better than Paper Towns. There are movies about people fulfilling real dreams and experiencing things more extraordinary than a fake Easter egg hunt with pretentious clues. In both cinema and real life, it gets better, kids.




The body swap thriller "Self/less" sounds like mediocre midsummer fare, dumped on a weekend between blockbusters. It's got a tired conceit, one that's been spent since the '80s, and what's up with that weird slash in the title?
And yet the film is a lot better than it should be, mostly thanks to helmer Tarsem Singh ("The Cell"), an accomplished visual stylist who has a way of elevating mediocre material by enveloping it in memorable imagery.
The story finds New York real estate mogul Damian (Ben Kingsley) dying from cancer and doing what all fabulously wealthy, egotistical individuals would probably love to do: signing up for a radical scientific treatment that will transfer his consciousness into a younger body (Ryan Reynolds).
Eventually, the joy of bringing young women home from the club and limberly shooting hoops without any pain gives way to the reality that the circumstances behind the procedure masterminded by the creepily calm Dr. Albright (Matthew Goode) are far more complex than they seemed.
The movie builds intrigue in the early scenes, embodied by the pathos Kingsley brings and the ways Singh embellishes it by capturing the gray, cold light of the autumnal city.
It's packed with virtuoso filmmaking, including a montage sequence that pulsates with energy, a persistent sense of disorientation and action scenes that are rendered with an eye for spatial relations.
The letdown comes in terms of a narrative that fails to uphold the initial promise, descending into a series of progressively sillier plot developments that trample the character development and broader moral questions raised here, sending things into a disappointingly conventional direction. Reynolds, an underrated actor, conveys plenty of turmoil as Damian's dream of eternal life is shattered in the service of doing the right thing, but the screenplay by David and Alex Pastor gives him little of interest to do. By the time the picture ends, it all matters much less than it should.





In 2015, when Hollywood rolls out yet another remake, there’s no point in asking, “Why?” Hollywood gonna Hollywood, and the only way studios are going to quit remaking classics is if people quit going to see them. The original Poltergeist is inarguably a classic. Besides the obvious scares from the titular, malevolent being, the Tobe Hooper-directed/Steven Spielberg-produced and co-written ghost story from 1982 left audiences with lingering dread cued up from the signifiers of suburban stultification: the sameness of the subdivision, the bored mom’s secret weed stash, the television as a family focal point, the supercilious abandon with which real estate developers pile two-story tract homes onto cemeteries. Thirty-three years later, the extra-planar closet portal still yawns open and the toys come to life, but the socio-political subtext is mostly absent, resulting in a supernatural horror movie that will move your pulse in places but do little to nudge your soul.

In this go-round, the original’s dusty SoCal ’burb is replaced by a nameless one in Illinois. The characters’ names have also changed. Ostensibly, this is an attempt to modernize the movie –– kids aren’t named Robbie, Dana, and Carol-Anne anymore. Sam Rockwell stars as Eric Bowen, a recently laid-off father of three, married to Amy (Rosemarie DeWitt), an aspiring writer. The children are fairly one-note. Kendra (Saxon Sharbino) is a vapid, spiteful teenager. Middle child Griffin (Kyle Catlett) is scared of everything. Youngest Maddy (Kennedi Clements) is simply adorable. They all move into a nice house (the “least sucky” in their price range, according to Amy), and before long, the weird stuff starts happening. Echoing the plot of the original, the house was built on a cemetery. The interred bodies were supposed to be moved elsewhere, but the developer merely relocated the headstones. Griffin finds a chunk of spinal column in the flower garden. Maddy talks to the spirits through the TV, gets sucked into their realm through her closet, and the family resorts to a team of university paranormal researchers led by Dr. Brooke Powell (Jane Adams), who is forced to call upon experienced ghost hunter Carrington Burke (Jared Harris) when the haunts prove too menacing for her to deal with. Griffin flies his drone into the spirit world, and the movie suffers from feeling overly complicated.

The film delivers some tense moments, but it doesn’t carry the emotional heft of the original. To say that this Poltergeist is devoid of message and meaning isn’t entirely accurate, because the parents are struggling with the aimlessness and fleeting agency of modern adulthood. At one point, Eric tries to buy gardening supplies with expired credit cards. The next scene shows him returning home with a bunch of expensive gifts for his kids. The spending spree as a means of family provision is a contemporary analog to the original’s workaholic dad, and in both cases, the acquisition and use of money isn’t entirely helpful to parenting — in the remake, the smartphone he buys for Kendra actually leads her into the basement, where she is nearly swallowed by a pit of sludge. Amy remarks on several occasions that she sucks at being a mom, but it still feels like lip service or a token attempt at adding depth to the character. It’s a tough act to swallow, unfortunately.

Still, though the movie itself is unnecessary, it delivers some entertaining scares. In most cases, they’re reinterpreted iterations of the originals — the closet, the creepy clown doll, the horrifyingly ancient tree snaking through a window and carrying out a child — but they’re mostly effective, as long as you can set aside what gave you the willies 33 years ago. Yes, the CGI tree that crashes through the skylight in Griffin’s bedroom is scary, but when Eric and Amy return from a dinner party to find him dangling and screaming from its branches (the tree even lets him down with barely any incident), it doesn’t have the impact of Craig T. Nelson trying to pull his son, muddy and bloody, from a demonic oak tree that’s literally trying to swallow him whole. And while the tech toys (Kendra’s smartphone, Griffin’s remote-controlled drone) end up being central to the plot, they clutter the narrative and the scenery more than move the story. For audiences unfamiliar with the source material, it’s a reliably thrilling summer popcorn movie. Hopefully, the producers will let the spirit of ’82 finally rest in peace.