The best part of the man-are-we-baked-or-what prank "Dude, Where's My Car?" is an exchange that happens almost immediately.
Dude One: "Dude, where's my car?"
Dude Two: "Where's your car, dude?"

Dude One: "Dude, where's my car?"
Dude Two: "Where's your car?"
Dude One: "Dude, it's not funny, dude. My car is gone."

It's a shamelessly amusing duet that comes off like a Blink 182 riff on Abbott and Costello's "Who's on first?" routine. The kind of thing you'd iron on a shirt. That banter is so good it almost excuses the mostly inept exercise that contains it.
"Dude, Where's My Car?" operates in a limbo between the relentlessly moronic and the legitimately entertaining, while almost solving the vehicular existentialism suggested by its title. Two L.A. guys wake up the morning after an unspecified night of debauchery and realize one guy's car is missing. They hit the streets and run into characters from the night before, who want to kill them or sleep with them or help them retrieve something called the continuum transfunctor, which sounds as if it's gone missing from George Clinton's house.
"Dude" was written by Philip Stark and directed by Danny Leiner, all apparently without ever leaving the frat-house sofa. A hangover suffices for a variation on the bumped-head-induces-amnesia template.
"That '70s Show" dolt Ashton Kutcher plays dumb to Seann William Scott's dumber. Together, they give himbo-chic a stoner's haze. They also make an entire idiot -- one whose face must be having a five-star charley horse from holding that pothead smile.
The film's disarming innocuousness extends from Kutcher and Scott to its reluctance to catch either kid in the act of blazing up. But that's because most of "Dude" appears to have been made with the smoke that wafted from under the crew's bedroom door. Don't tell Mom, but everybody seems stoned.
Accordingly, the contact high is weird: When the thing was over, the collection of frat boys in the row in front of me actually hissed. But, dude, they were laughing the entire 85 minutes. The buyer's remorse factor might be as high as the product. But the movie more or less begins at its wit's end. The devolution, meanwhile, has it charms -- even if most of them belong on a T- shirt.