Oh, to be at the Capitol, now that “Oz” is here, must have been the dearest wish of New Yorkers yesterday. A goodly number of the population turned out to see the first showing of the picture and the jam around the theatre kept the police busy from the time the line began to form at 6 A.M. on through the day.

The crowds flocked to the Capitol to see the long heralded Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer film version of the famous Baum stories and to welcome the little star of the picture, Judy Garland, who is making personal appearances with the irrepressible Mickey Rooney, on the stage.

It was an enthusiastic and friendly throng for whom Judy and Mickey sang and danced with all the verve and rhythmic bounce of youth. The audience was enthusiastic about the picture, which is a delightful fantasy of the “Snow White and Seven Dwarfs” type. Real people, of course, represent the leading characters of the L. Frank Baum stories, on which the film is based, and which gave pleasure to children for several generations. These stories were used as the basis of the musical comedy, “The Wizard of Oz,” which served the starring team of Montgomery and Stone during many theatrical seasons.

The first part of the film, showing Dorothy Gale’s home on the Kansas farm, is photographed in sepia, which merges into the bright tints of the Technicolor process when the story moves into the dream fantasy that is the land of Oz.

The background of Munchkin land, the forest and the Emerald City of Oz are imaginatively realized on the screen. The little people of Munchkin land, where Dorothy finds herself after being blown away from her Kansas home in the funnel of a cyclone, are delightfully represented by a group of Singer midgets. Billie Burke is charming as the good fairy, Glinda, and Margaret Hamilton, in a poison green makeup, is the wicked West Witch, who is terrible enough to frighten little children.

With Bert Lahr as the Cowardly Lion, Ray Bolger as the Scarecrow, Judy Garland as Dorothy, and Jack Haley as the Tin Woodman, the stars of "The Wizard of Oz" sing together in this scene from the 1939 MGM classic film.

The satire of the fable is not as cleverly pointed as it was in Disney’s cartoon of “Snow White,” but the broad comedy of Bert Lahr’s Cowardly Lion, Ray Bolger’s Strawman, Jack Haley’s Tin Woodman and Frank Morgan’s Wizard, make up for those side-tickling subtle touches that made the Disney comedy a classic of the screen.

Judy Garland is perfectly cast as Dorothy. She is as clever a little actress as she is a singer and her special style of vocalizing is ideally adapted to the music of the picture.