Early in “Jurassic World,” the audience is introduced to Gray Mitchell (Ty Simpkins), a dinosaur-obsessed young boy viewing stereoscopic slides of ancient carnivores and herbivores through an old-fashioned View-Master.

The images we see come from a View-Master slide pack titled “Prehistoric Animals,” which featured dioramas taken from the Ray Harryhausen-animated dinosaur segment of a 1956 Irwin Allen film about evolution and biodiversity called “The Animal World.” When I was a similarly dinosaur-obsessed young boy in the 1960s, my family owned that pack, and I must have viewed those pictures hundreds if not thousands of times.

Encountered unexpectedly, those images inspired fond memories, but “Jurassic World” intends them to be more than a nostalgia trigger in older viewers: They are evidence of another type of evolution, the progression in special effects and “monster photography” that has taken place over the past several decades. While a dinosaur-loving kid in the 1960s was happy to amuse himself with quaintly static dimensional slides, a kid today expects to see amazingly fearsome computer-generated dinosaurs of almost life-size proportions snarling across a giant movie screen, in state-of-the-art 3D. Is that enough?



Exciting if flawed, “Jurassic World” is a film that critiques its own mission. It is aware that moviegoers, awash in blockbusters and computer-generated movie “magic,” are increasingly hard to awe. “No one’s impressed by a dinosaur anymore,” asserts Claire Dearing (Bryce Dallas Howard), operations manager of the movie’s title theme park, devoted to scientifically recreated prehistoric fauna. “Consumers want them bigger, louder and with more teeth.” Thus, the park’s latest “asset,” a newly developed “genetic hybrid” dubbed “Indominus rex,” a Tyrannosaur-and-more monster intended to boost attendance and placate shareholders (like the ones invested in Comcast-owned Universal Pictures, the distributor of “Jurassic World”). In other words, Indominus rex was created to be an answer not just to the onscreen theme park’s declining revenues but also to the offscreen movie industry’s box office blues. “We wanted something scary and easy to pronounce,” Claire explains.

With this theme, “Jurassic World” wants to have its sauropod and eat it, too, but the message is hard to digest. The eye-popping technical wizardry and thrilling spectacle on display throughout “Jurassic World” belie the notion that anyone involved in the film truly longs for an era of simpler monster pleasures, even as the filmmakers take a certain bloodthirsty glee in symbolicallly punishing the “Jurassic World” audience by impaling Jurassic World theme park attendees on pterodactyl beaks.

As a cautionary fable about unethical science and Mesozoic GMO’s, “Jurassic World” also falls short. If director Steven Spielberg’s “Jurassic Park” (1993) and its sequels, “The Lost World: Jurassic Park” (1997) and “Jurassic Park III” (2001), suggested tampering with Mother Nature could lead to “chaos” (to borrow the Jeff Goldblum character’s signature term), the Spielberg-produced “Jurassic World” seems to have made peace with the idea of using science to revive extinct animals; instead, it tsk-tsks those who seek to manufacture new species. (In science-fiction cinema, is there a sliding scale for playing God?) In “Jurassic Park,” adapted from the 1990 best-seller by Michael Crichton, the Santa Claus-like John Hammond (Richard Attenborough) was as responsible as anyone for the death and destruction that occurred, but this new “World” places the blame primarily on the most familiar of movie suspects, corporate greed-mongers (who treat living creatures as “assets”) and military profiteers (who want to “weaponize” dinosaurs).



Another blemish is that the characters seem as prehistoric as the dinosaurs. The movie suggests that Howard’s uptight, almost robotic Claire — her angular features echoed by shoulder pads, a geometric haircut and impractical stiletto heels — is less than a complete woman because she, unlike her sister (Judy Greer), has no children. (For the crime of emulating her boss, Claire’s assistant, a similarly un-warm type played by Katie McGrath, is given the movie’s most protracted and sadistic death.) In contrast, the lead adult male character, Owen Grady (Chris Pratt), is cool from the get-go, an animal-loving “bad-ass” who has become “alpha male” to a pack of trained Velociraptors.

Less problematic is the depiction of the story’s second pair of leads, Gray, a precocious dino-expert with an enviable head of hair, and his teenage brother, Zach (Nick Robinson), who is more interested in scoping out human female fauna than in chasing after giant reptiles. Gray and Zach are generic-issue movie kids but also Claire’s nephews, so their main function is to strike a maternal spark in Claire’s flinty heart.

So, I have a lot of complaints, right? Even so, I was pretty much thrilled by “Jurassic World,” as I probably will be by every movie that feeds my appetite for hungry dinosaurs depicted with ferocious (apparent) realism.



Set 22 years after the first “Jurassic Park,” “Jurassic World” imagines that the Central American island of Isla Nublar has become a successfully Disneyfied zoo-slash-theme park, complete with baby Triceratops rides (where’s PETA when you need it?) and a Sea World-style water tank containing a huge Mosasaurus. (In a Spielberg-specific wink at the notion that audiences are hard to impress these days, a dangling shark is used as bait for the performing sea monster; in other words, take that, “Jaws.”)

Of course, the two nephews slip away from their guide, to take an unauthorized trip into Ankylosaurus territory; meanwhile, the Indominus rex escapes its paddock. Efforts to re-establish order inevitably fail, and soon the park’s visitors are fleeing from ravening pterodactyls (cue “The Birds”) while hapless mercenaries become ’raptor food. The movie’s many elaborate set pieces are staged with brio by director Colin Trevorrow (also one of the film’s four credited writers), a relative newcomer plucked from indie world on the strength of his lone narrative feature film, “Safety Not Guaranteed.” That 2012 Sundance premiere had an oddball premise and a hip cast (Mark Duplass, Aubrey Plaza) and setting (Washington State), but otherwise was entirely conventional, which may have been what reassured Universal.